docs/applications/istio.md, before:

# Istio Ambient Service Mesh

## Overview

Istio Ambient mode provides a sidecarless service mesh architecture for the homelab cluster. It handles mTLS encryption, L4 authorization, and telemetry without injecting sidecar proxies into application pods.

**Version:** 1.28.3 (Helm charts)
**Last Updated:** 2026-02-05

## Architecture

### Components

| Component | Type | Purpose | Resource Usage |
|-----------|------|---------|----------------|
| istiod | Deployment | Control plane, certificate management | ~6m CPU, ~35Mi |
| istio-cni-node | DaemonSet | CNI plugin for traffic redirection | ~1m CPU, ~12-15Mi per node |
| ztunnel | DaemonSet | L4 proxy, mTLS termination | ~1-2m CPU, ~1-2Mi per node |

### Why Ambient Mode?

Compared to traditional sidecar mode:

- **90% less overhead**: No per-pod sidecar proxies
- **Scales with nodes, not pods**: DaemonSets instead of sidecars
- **Simpler operations**: No sidecar injection/restart cycles

### Comparison with Linkerd

| Metric | Linkerd | Istio Ambient | Winner |
|--------|---------|---------------|--------|
| Control plane memory | 66-73Mi | ~110Mi | Linkerd |
| Per-pod overhead | ~10-15Mi (sidecar) | 0 | Istio Ambient |
| Scales with | Pods | Nodes | Istio Ambient |
| Crossover point | - | ~5-6 pods | - |

**Decision:** Istio Ambient chosen for better scalability with many pods.

## Installation

### ArgoCD Applications

Istio is managed via ArgoCD with the following sync wave order:

| Application | Sync Wave | Chart |
|-------------|-----------|-------|
| istio-base | -45 | CRDs and base resources |
| istiod | -44 | Control plane |
| istio-cni | -43 | CNI plugin |
| istio-ztunnel | -42 | Data plane proxy |

### Files

```
manifests/
├── applications/
│   ├── istio-base.yaml
│   ├── istiod.yaml
│   └── istio-cni.yaml      # includes ztunnel
└── base/
    ├── istio/
    │   ├── istiod-values.yaml
    │   ├── ztunnel-values.yaml
    │   └── cni-values.yaml
    └── network-policies/
        └── istio-system/
            └── network-policy.yaml
```

## Adding Namespaces to the Mesh

To add a namespace to the ambient mesh:

```bash
kubectl label namespace <namespace> istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
```

### Currently Meshed Namespaces

- `default` - Prometheus, Grafana, AlertManager
- `loki` - Loki, Promtail, loki-canary
- `localstack` - LocalStack S3 emulator
- `argo-workflows` - Argo Workflows server and controller
- `unipoller` - UniFi metrics exporter
- `trivy-system` - Trivy vulnerability scanner

### NetworkPolicy Requirements

**IMPORTANT**: Istio ambient uses transparent proxy - source IPs are preserved. NetworkPolicies must allow HBONE port 15008 from all communicating namespaces, not just istio-system.

#### Egress Rules (required for meshed pods to communicate out)

```yaml
egress:
  # Allow ztunnel communication
  - to:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15012  # istiod gRPC
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15017  # istiod webhook
```

#### Ingress Rules (required for meshed pods to receive traffic)

```yaml
ingress:
  # Allow HBONE from istio-system (ztunnel terminates tunnel)
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>  # Application port (ztunnel originates connection)

  # Allow HBONE from source namespace (transparent proxy preserves source IP)
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <source-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS (transparent proxy)
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>  # Application port
```

#### Intra-namespace Communication

For pods within the same meshed namespace to communicate:

```yaml
ingress:
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <same-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS (transparent proxy)
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>
```

## Verification

### Check mesh status

```bash
# Verify ztunnel sees workloads
istioctl ztunnel-config workloads

# Check for HBONE protocol (indicates mTLS active)
istioctl ztunnel-config workloads | grep localstack
# Should show: HBONE (not TCP)
```

### Check ArgoCD status

```bash
kubectl get applications -n argocd | grep istio
```

### Resource usage

```bash
kubectl top pods -n istio-system
```

**Current measurements (6 namespaces, 29 pods in mesh):**

| Component | Instances | CPU | Memory |
|-----------|-----------|-----|--------|
| istiod | 1 | ~3m | ~39Mi |
| istio-cni-node | 5 | ~5m | ~68Mi |
| ztunnel | 5 | ~30m | ~38Mi |
| **Total** | - | **~38m** | **~145Mi** |

Note: ztunnel CPU varies with traffic volume.

## Troubleshooting

### Pod not joining mesh

1. Verify namespace label:

   ```bash
   kubectl get namespace <ns> -o jsonpath='{.metadata.labels}'
   ```

2. Check ztunnel logs:

   ```bash
   kubectl logs -n istio-system -l app=ztunnel --tail=50
   ```

3. Verify NetworkPolicy allows egress to istio-system

### HBONE connection timeout

If ztunnel logs show errors like:

```
error="connection timed out, maybe a NetworkPolicy is blocking HBONE port 15008"
```

This indicates NetworkPolicy is blocking HBONE traffic. Check:

1. **Ingress on destination**: Must allow port 15008 from source namespace
2. **Egress on source**: Must allow port 15008 to destination namespace
3. **Transparent proxy**: Source IP is preserved, so allow from the actual source namespace (not just istio-system)

Example fix:

```yaml
# On destination namespace NetworkPolicy
ingress:
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <source-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>
```

### ArgoCD shows OutOfSync

:::info Resolved (2026-02-05)
All Istio ArgoCD applications are now fully Synced and Healthy after comprehensive `ignoreDifferences` were added in PRs #379, #380, and #381.
:::

OutOfSync can occur due to:

1. **Webhook caBundle drift**: Kubernetes auto-populates `caBundle` fields in webhook configurations
2. **Helm operator labels**: The Helm chart adds `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: Helm` and `meta.helm.sh/release-*` labels at runtime
3. **ServerSideApply K8s defaults**: With `ServerSideApply=true`, Kubernetes populates default values (imagePullPolicy, revisionHistoryLimit, readinessProbe defaults, dnsPolicy, restartPolicy, schedulerName, etc.) not present in Helm templates

**Solution - Use ignoreDifferences with jqPathExpressions:**

Configure `ignoreDifferences` in ArgoCD Application specs. For DaemonSets with ServerSideApply, you must enumerate ALL Kubernetes-defaulted fields:

```yaml
spec:
  ignoreDifferences:
    # Webhook caBundle
    - group: admissionregistration.k8s.io
      kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .webhooks[]?.clientConfig.caBundle
    # Helm operator labels
    - group: "*"
      kind: "*"
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .metadata.labels["app.kubernetes.io/managed-by"]
        - .metadata.labels["meta.helm.sh/release-name"]
        - .metadata.labels["meta.helm.sh/release-namespace"]
    # K8s-defaulted fields (required for ServerSideApply)
    - group: apps
      kind: DaemonSet
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .metadata.labels
        - .metadata.annotations
        - .spec.revisionHistoryLimit
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].imagePullPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].terminationMessagePath
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].terminationMessagePolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.dnsPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.restartPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.schedulerName
        - .spec.template.spec.securityContext
        # ... plus env fieldRef, readinessProbe defaults, volume defaults
  syncPolicy:
    syncOptions:
      - ServerSideApply=true
      - RespectIgnoreDifferences=true
```

:::warning Application Manifest Updates
After merging `ignoreDifferences` changes, you must `kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/<app>.yaml` to update the Application spec in-cluster. ArgoCD self-management does NOT auto-deploy Application manifest changes.
:::

**To force full sync (causes brief disruption):**

```bash
# Delete and let ArgoCD recreate
kubectl delete application istio-base istiod istio-cni istio-ztunnel -n argocd
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istio-base.yaml
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istiod.yaml
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istio-cni.yaml
```

## Removal

To remove a namespace from the mesh:

```bash
kubectl label namespace <namespace> istio.io/dataplane-mode-
kubectl rollout restart deployment -n <namespace>
```

To completely remove Istio:

```bash
kubectl delete application istio-ztunnel istio-cni istiod istio-base -n argocd
kubectl delete namespace istio-system
```

## References

- [Istio Ambient Mode Documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/)
- [Istio Helm Charts](https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts)
- [Ambient Mode Getting Started](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/getting-started/)

Commit message:

docs: sync with Feb 2026 cluster changes (#67)
* docs: sync with Feb 2026 cluster changes

Update 9 documentation files to reflect recent cluster work:
- ingress-nginx: Helm migration, security headers, ServiceMonitor, resource limits
- network-policies: 10→12 namespaces, fix DNS AND/OR semantics, add ingress-nginx/istio-system/gatekeeper-system
- gatekeeper: Exclusion audit 10→2 namespaces, updated exemption list
- argocd: Chart 9.4.2, add ingress-nginx to app list, update sync waves, SSA force-sync warning
- cert-manager: Updated resource limits for Gatekeeper compliance
- istio: Note Linkerd removal, add NetworkPolicy section
- intro: Update namespace count, add ingress hardening section
- networking/overview: Update ingress version and NetworkPolicy list
- synology-csi: Add resource limits documentation

* docs: address Copilot review comments

- Fix namespace count 12→13 across network-policies.md, intro.md, networking/overview.md
- Fix sync wave table in argocd.md to match actual manifests (sealed-secrets -25, cert-manager -10, etc.)
- Remove --force from manual sync examples (incompatible with SSA)
- Fix ingress-nginx sync wave description (-30, before cert-manager at -10)
- Clarify SSA migration wording (field-level ownership, not Helm labels)
- Fix "nginx-ingress" → "ingress-nginx" naming consistency in networking/overview.md
- Update Network Policies header date to January-February 2026

---------

Co-authored-by: Ian McBeth <imcbeth1980@gmail.com>

docs/applications/istio.md, after:

# Istio Ambient Service Mesh

## Overview

Istio Ambient mode provides a sidecarless service mesh architecture for the homelab cluster. It handles mTLS encryption, L4 authorization, and telemetry without injecting sidecar proxies into application pods.

**Version:** 1.28.3 (Helm charts)
**Last Updated:** 2026-02-05

## Architecture

### Components

| Component | Type | Purpose | Resource Usage |
|-----------|------|---------|----------------|
| istiod | Deployment | Control plane, certificate management | ~6m CPU, ~35Mi |
| istio-cni-node | DaemonSet | CNI plugin for traffic redirection | ~1m CPU, ~12-15Mi per node |
| ztunnel | DaemonSet | L4 proxy, mTLS termination | ~1-2m CPU, ~1-2Mi per node |

### Why Ambient Mode?

Compared to traditional sidecar mode:

- **90% less overhead**: No per-pod sidecar proxies
- **Scales with nodes, not pods**: DaemonSets instead of sidecars
- **Simpler operations**: No sidecar injection/restart cycles

### Comparison with Linkerd (Historical)

| Metric | Linkerd | Istio Ambient | Winner |
|--------|---------|---------------|--------|
| Control plane memory | 66-73Mi | ~110Mi | Linkerd |
| Per-pod overhead | ~10-15Mi (sidecar) | 0 | Istio Ambient |
| Scales with | Pods | Nodes | Istio Ambient |
| Crossover point | - | ~5-6 pods | - |

**Decision:** Istio Ambient chosen for better scalability with many pods. Linkerd manifests were evaluated in January 2026 but never deployed. All Linkerd dead code (ArgoCD applications, values, network policies) was removed in February 2026 (PR #441).

## Installation

### ArgoCD Applications

Istio is managed via ArgoCD with the following sync wave order:

| Application | Sync Wave | Chart |
|-------------|-----------|-------|
| istio-base | -45 | CRDs and base resources |
| istiod | -44 | Control plane |
| istio-cni | -43 | CNI plugin |
| istio-ztunnel | -42 | Data plane proxy |

### Files

```
manifests/
├── applications/
│   ├── istio-base.yaml
│   ├── istiod.yaml
│   └── istio-cni.yaml      # includes ztunnel
└── base/
    ├── istio/
    │   ├── istiod-values.yaml
    │   ├── ztunnel-values.yaml
    │   └── cni-values.yaml
    └── network-policies/
        └── istio-system/
            └── network-policy.yaml
```

## Adding Namespaces to the Mesh

To add a namespace to the ambient mesh:

```bash
kubectl label namespace <namespace> istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
```

### Currently Meshed Namespaces

- `default` - Prometheus, Grafana, AlertManager
- `loki` - Loki, Promtail, loki-canary
- `localstack` - LocalStack S3 emulator
- `argo-workflows` - Argo Workflows server and controller
- `unipoller` - UniFi metrics exporter
- `trivy-system` - Trivy vulnerability scanner

### NetworkPolicy Requirements

**IMPORTANT**: Istio ambient uses transparent proxy - source IPs are preserved. NetworkPolicies must allow HBONE port 15008 from all communicating namespaces, not just istio-system.

#### Egress Rules (required for meshed pods to communicate out)

```yaml
egress:
  # Allow ztunnel communication
  - to:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15012  # istiod gRPC
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15017  # istiod webhook
```

#### Ingress Rules (required for meshed pods to receive traffic)

```yaml
ingress:
  # Allow HBONE from istio-system (ztunnel terminates tunnel)
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: istio-system
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>  # Application port (ztunnel originates connection)

  # Allow HBONE from source namespace (transparent proxy preserves source IP)
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <source-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS (transparent proxy)
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>  # Application port
```

#### Intra-namespace Communication

For pods within the same meshed namespace to communicate:

```yaml
ingress:
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <same-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE mTLS (transparent proxy)
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>
```

## Verification

### Check mesh status

```bash
# Verify ztunnel sees workloads
istioctl ztunnel-config workloads

# Check for HBONE protocol (indicates mTLS active)
istioctl ztunnel-config workloads | grep localstack
# Should show: HBONE (not TCP)
```

### Check ArgoCD status

```bash
kubectl get applications -n argocd | grep istio
```

### Resource usage

```bash
kubectl top pods -n istio-system
```

**Current measurements (6 namespaces, 29 pods in mesh):**

| Component | Instances | CPU | Memory |
|-----------|-----------|-----|--------|
| istiod | 1 | ~3m | ~39Mi |
| istio-cni-node | 5 | ~5m | ~68Mi |
| ztunnel | 5 | ~30m | ~38Mi |
| **Total** | - | **~38m** | **~145Mi** |

Note: ztunnel CPU varies with traffic volume.

## Troubleshooting

### Pod not joining mesh

1. Verify namespace label:

   ```bash
   kubectl get namespace <ns> -o jsonpath='{.metadata.labels}'
   ```

2. Check ztunnel logs:

   ```bash
   kubectl logs -n istio-system -l app=ztunnel --tail=50
   ```

3. Verify NetworkPolicy allows egress to istio-system

### HBONE connection timeout

If ztunnel logs show errors like:

```
error="connection timed out, maybe a NetworkPolicy is blocking HBONE port 15008"
```

This indicates NetworkPolicy is blocking HBONE traffic. Check:

1. **Ingress on destination**: Must allow port 15008 from source namespace
2. **Egress on source**: Must allow port 15008 to destination namespace
3. **Transparent proxy**: Source IP is preserved, so allow from the actual source namespace (not just istio-system)

Example fix:

```yaml
# On destination namespace NetworkPolicy
ingress:
  - from:
      - namespaceSelector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: <source-namespace>
    ports:
      - protocol: TCP
        port: 15008  # HBONE
      - protocol: TCP
        port: <app-port>
```

### ArgoCD shows OutOfSync

:::info Resolved (2026-02-05)
All Istio ArgoCD applications are now fully Synced and Healthy after comprehensive `ignoreDifferences` were added in PRs #379, #380, and #381.
:::

OutOfSync can occur due to:

1. **Webhook caBundle drift**: Kubernetes auto-populates `caBundle` fields in webhook configurations
2. **Helm operator labels**: The Helm chart adds `app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: Helm` and `meta.helm.sh/release-*` labels at runtime
3. **ServerSideApply K8s defaults**: With `ServerSideApply=true`, Kubernetes populates default values (imagePullPolicy, revisionHistoryLimit, readinessProbe defaults, dnsPolicy, restartPolicy, schedulerName, etc.) not present in Helm templates

**Solution - Use ignoreDifferences with jqPathExpressions:**

Configure `ignoreDifferences` in ArgoCD Application specs. For DaemonSets with ServerSideApply, you must enumerate ALL Kubernetes-defaulted fields:

```yaml
spec:
  ignoreDifferences:
    # Webhook caBundle
    - group: admissionregistration.k8s.io
      kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .webhooks[]?.clientConfig.caBundle
    # Helm operator labels
    - group: "*"
      kind: "*"
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .metadata.labels["app.kubernetes.io/managed-by"]
        - .metadata.labels["meta.helm.sh/release-name"]
        - .metadata.labels["meta.helm.sh/release-namespace"]
    # K8s-defaulted fields (required for ServerSideApply)
    - group: apps
      kind: DaemonSet
      jqPathExpressions:
        - .metadata.labels
        - .metadata.annotations
        - .spec.revisionHistoryLimit
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].imagePullPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].terminationMessagePath
        - .spec.template.spec.containers[].terminationMessagePolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.dnsPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.restartPolicy
        - .spec.template.spec.schedulerName
        - .spec.template.spec.securityContext
        # ... plus env fieldRef, readinessProbe defaults, volume defaults
  syncPolicy:
    syncOptions:
      - ServerSideApply=true
      - RespectIgnoreDifferences=true
```

:::warning Application Manifest Updates
After merging `ignoreDifferences` changes, you must `kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/<app>.yaml` to update the Application spec in-cluster. ArgoCD self-management does NOT auto-deploy Application manifest changes.
:::

**To force full sync (causes brief disruption):**

```bash
# Delete and let ArgoCD recreate
kubectl delete application istio-base istiod istio-cni istio-ztunnel -n argocd
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istio-base.yaml
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istiod.yaml
kubectl apply -f manifests/applications/istio-cni.yaml
```

## NetworkPolicy

The `istio-system` namespace has a dedicated NetworkPolicy (added 2026-02-14, PR #442) controlling traffic to and from the mesh control plane:

**Allowed Ingress:**

- HBONE tunnel (port 15008) from all namespaces (bare rule, no selectors)
- istiod xDS/gRPC (ports 15010, 15012, 15014, 15017) from all namespaces
- Prometheus metrics scraping from default namespace
- Webhook calls from control plane nodes (10.0.10.0/24)
- Link-local health probes (169.254.7.127/32)

**Allowed Egress:**

- DNS, Kubernetes API
- HBONE tunnel (port 15008) to all namespaces
- External HTTPS for certificate validation

## Removal

To remove a namespace from the mesh:

```bash
kubectl label namespace <namespace> istio.io/dataplane-mode-
kubectl rollout restart deployment -n <namespace>
```

To completely remove Istio:

```bash
kubectl delete application istio-ztunnel istio-cni istiod istio-base -n argocd
kubectl delete namespace istio-system
```

## References

- [Istio Ambient Mode Documentation](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/)
- [Istio Helm Charts](https://istio-release.storage.googleapis.com/charts)
- [Ambient Mode Getting Started](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/getting-started/)
