docs/getting-started/overview.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: "Overview"
description: "Overview of the homelab setup and architecture"
---

# Homelab Overview

This homelab is designed as a production-ready Kubernetes cluster built on Raspberry Pi hardware, providing a cost-effective platform for learning and experimentation with enterprise technologies.

## Architecture Overview

```mermaid
graph TB
    Internet --> UniFi[UniFi Gateway]
    UniFi --> Switch[PoE Switch TL-SG1008MP]
    Switch --> Pi1[Pi5 Master Node]
    Switch --> Pi2[Pi5 Worker Node 1]
    Switch --> Pi3[Pi5 Worker Node 2]
    Switch --> Pi4[Pi5 Worker Node 3]
    Switch --> Pi5[Pi5 Worker Node 4]
    Switch --> NAS[Synology NAS]

    Pi1 --> K8s[Kubernetes Cluster]
    Pi2 --> K8s
    Pi3 --> K8s
    Pi4 --> K8s
    Pi5 --> K8s

    NAS --> iSCSI[iSCSI Storage]
    iSCSI --> K8s

    K8s --> ArgoCD[GitOps with ArgoCD]
    K8s --> Prometheus[Monitoring Stack]
    K8s --> Apps[Applications]
```

## Key Components

### Hardware Layer

- **5x Raspberry Pi 5**: 16GB RAM each with active cooling
- **PoE+ Switch**: Powers all Pi devices through single cable
- **NVMe SSDs**: 256GB storage per Pi for fast I/O
- **Synology NAS**: Network-attached storage for persistent data

### Network Layer

- **UniFi Gateway**: Enterprise-grade routing and firewall
- **Network Monitoring**: Real-time metrics collection
- **VLAN Segmentation**: Isolated network segments for security

### Kubernetes Layer

- **Control Plane**: Single master node with HA storage
- **Worker Nodes**: 4x worker nodes for application workloads
- **CNI**: Calico for network policy and connectivity
- **Storage**: Synology CSI for persistent volumes

### Application Layer

- **GitOps**: ArgoCD for declarative application management
- **Monitoring**: Prometheus, Grafana, and AlertManager
- **DNS**: Pi-hole for network-level ad blocking
- **Ingress**: NGINX Ingress Controller with TLS

## Design Principles

### High Availability

- Multi-node cluster design
- Persistent storage for critical data
- Network redundancy where possible
- Automated failover for applications

### Observability

- Comprehensive metrics collection
- Centralized logging (planned)
- Network performance monitoring
- Infrastructure health monitoring

### Security

- Network segmentation with VLANs
- Certificate management with cert-manager
- Secrets management with Kubernetes secrets
- Regular security updates

### Automation

- GitOps workflow for all deployments
- Automated certificate renewal
- Self-healing applications
- Infrastructure as code

## Benefits of This Setup

1. **Learning Platform**: Hands-on experience with enterprise technologies
2. **Cost Effective**: Professional setup without enterprise hardware costs
3. **Scalable**: Easy to add nodes or upgrade components
4. **Production-like**: Real-world technologies and practices
5. **Energy Efficient**: Low power consumption compared to traditional servers

## Use Cases

- **Development Environment**: Test applications in Kubernetes
- **Home Automation**: Self-hosted smart home applications
- **Network Services**: DNS, monitoring, and network tools
- **Learning Lab**: Experiment with new technologies safely
- **Backup Target**: Reliable storage for important data

## Performance Characteristics

- **Total RAM**: 80GB across cluster
- **Storage**: 1.28TB NVMe + NAS expansion
- **Network**: Gigabit Ethernet with PoE+
- **Power**: ~100W total consumption
- **Availability**: 99%+ uptime with proper maintenance

This architecture provides an excellent foundation for learning Kubernetes, cloud-native technologies, and modern infrastructure practices while maintaining reasonable costs and power consumption.

Commit message:

docs: sync documentation with live cluster state (Feb 2026) (#66)
* docs: comprehensive update to match live cluster state

Fix critical inaccuracies across 17 files:
- Replace 6 placeholder GitHub URLs (your-username -> imcbeth)
- Update node IPs (node01: 235, node02: 211, node03: 244)
- Remove all Pi-hole references (removed from cluster)
- Update 9 component versions (ArgoCD v3.3.0, Prometheus Stack
  81.6.1, Falco 4.20.1, Sealed Secrets 2.18.0, UniFi Poller
  v2.33.0, External-DNS v0.20.0, Synology CSI v1.2.1, Loki 6.53.0)
- Fix Trivy v0.29.0 bug status (resolved via PR #410)
- Move Blackbox Exporter from planned to completed
- Fix overview.md (Loki deployed, Sealed Secrets, Tigera Operator)
- Update pod count (60-80 -> 110), progress (78% -> 90%)
- Add missing sidebar entries (argo-workflows, localstack, runtime-security)
- Fix navbar/footer labels (Tutorial -> Docs)

* fix: address Copilot review feedback

- Add note explaining Falco Helm chart version numbering migration
- Fix secret count from 7 to 8 (external-dns has 2 secrets)
- Clarify Velero PVC table: show all cluster PVCs with backup status
  column to resolve inconsistency between backup scope and PVC list

---------

Co-authored-by: Ian McBeth <imcbeth1980@gmail.com>

docs/getting-started/overview.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: "Overview"
description: "Overview of the homelab setup and architecture"
---

# Homelab Overview

This homelab is designed as a production-ready Kubernetes cluster built on Raspberry Pi hardware, providing a cost-effective platform for learning and experimentation with enterprise technologies.

## Architecture Overview

```mermaid
graph TB
    Internet --> UniFi[UniFi Gateway]
    UniFi --> Switch[UniFi USW-Pro-24-PoE]
    Switch --> Pi1[Pi5 Master Node]
    Switch --> Pi2[Pi5 Worker Node 1]
    Switch --> Pi3[Pi5 Worker Node 2]
    Switch --> Pi4[Pi5 Worker Node 3]
    Switch --> Pi5[Pi5 Worker Node 4]
    Switch --> NAS[Synology NAS]

    Pi1 --> K8s[Kubernetes Cluster]
    Pi2 --> K8s
    Pi3 --> K8s
    Pi4 --> K8s
    Pi5 --> K8s

    NAS --> iSCSI[iSCSI Storage]
    iSCSI --> K8s

    K8s --> ArgoCD[GitOps with ArgoCD]
    K8s --> Prometheus[Monitoring Stack]
    K8s --> Apps[Applications]
```

## Key Components

### Hardware Layer

- **5x Raspberry Pi 5**: 16GB RAM each with active cooling
- **PoE+ Switch**: Powers all Pi devices through single cable
- **NVMe SSDs**: 256GB storage per Pi for fast I/O
- **Synology NAS**: Network-attached storage for persistent data

### Network Layer

- **UniFi Gateway**: Enterprise-grade routing and firewall
- **Network Monitoring**: Real-time metrics collection
- **VLAN Segmentation**: Isolated network segments for security

### Kubernetes Layer

- **Control Plane**: Single master node with HA storage
- **Worker Nodes**: 4x worker nodes for application workloads
- **CNI**: Calico v3.31.3 via Tigera Operator for network policy and connectivity
- **Storage**: Synology CSI for persistent volumes

### Application Layer

- **GitOps**: ArgoCD for declarative application management
- **Monitoring**: Prometheus, Grafana, and AlertManager
- **DNS**: External-DNS with Cloudflare and UniFi providers
- **Ingress**: NGINX Ingress Controller with TLS

## Design Principles

### High Availability

- Multi-node cluster design
- Persistent storage for critical data
- Network redundancy where possible
- Automated failover for applications

### Observability

- Comprehensive metrics collection
- Centralized logging with Loki + Promtail
- Network performance monitoring
- Infrastructure health monitoring

### Security

- Network segmentation with VLANs
- Certificate management with cert-manager
- Secrets management with Sealed Secrets (GitOps-compatible encryption)
- Regular security updates

### Automation

- GitOps workflow for all deployments
- Automated certificate renewal
- Self-healing applications
- Infrastructure as code

## Benefits of This Setup

1. **Learning Platform**: Hands-on experience with enterprise technologies
2. **Cost Effective**: Professional setup without enterprise hardware costs
3. **Scalable**: Easy to add nodes or upgrade components
4. **Production-like**: Real-world technologies and practices
5. **Energy Efficient**: Low power consumption compared to traditional servers

## Use Cases

- **Development Environment**: Test applications in Kubernetes
- **Home Automation**: Self-hosted smart home applications
- **Network Services**: DNS, monitoring, and network tools
- **Learning Lab**: Experiment with new technologies safely
- **Backup Target**: Reliable storage for important data

## Performance Characteristics

- **Total RAM**: 80GB across cluster
- **Storage**: 1.28TB NVMe + NAS expansion
- **Network**: Gigabit Ethernet with PoE+
- **Power**: ~100W total consumption
- **Availability**: 99%+ uptime with proper maintenance

This architecture provides an excellent foundation for learning Kubernetes, cloud-native technologies, and modern infrastructure practices while maintaining reasonable costs and power consumption.
